---
date: 2009-05-16T02:00:00
title: The conceptual foundations and the economics network neutrality [Part 1] - 14 May 2009, Rome
tags: [economics, network, neutrality, politics]
categories: [politics]
---

<p><a
href="http://www.fub.it/events/seminari/neutralitadellareteeaspettisocioeconomici">http://www.fub.it/events/seminari/neutralitadellareteeaspettisocioeconomici</a></p>


<p><a href="http://www.nnsquad.it/">http://www.nnsquad.it/</a></p>


<h2>Neutrality &#8211; <em>&#8220;Economy is dematerializing&#8221;</em></h2>


<p>Solicited by a Facebook message sent to all the members of the <a
href="http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=56353912528">nnsquad.it &#8211; for
a neutral Internet</a> members on 6 May 2009, I stumbled upon this interesting
event I had the occasion to participate, held in the <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palazzo_Pallavicini-Rospigliosi">17th
century Rospigliosi palace</a> in the heart of <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rome">Rome</a>.</p>


<p style="text-align:center;"><img src="/posts/2009-05-16-the-conceptual-foundations-and-the-economics-network-neutrality-rome/IMG_0261.jpg" alt="" /></p>


<p style="text-align:right;"><em>In this photo: <a
href="http://kennethrcarter.com/vita/">Kenneth Carter</a> and <a
href="http://blog.quintarelli.it/">Stefano Quintarelli</a></em></p>


<p><a name="continue"></a> The preface looked pretty good: technicians, Ph.Ds,
telco spokesmen and politicians speaking about the internet, its inborn
freedom, and how to cope with this in a society where security measures are <a
href="http://sniffo.org/node/22">constantly increasing</a>, and as such
contrast in a virtual world with no barriers whatsoever. Furthermore,
it&#8217;s a virtual arena in which everything can be free, <a
href="http://thepiratebay.org/">not only information</a>, and people is
becoming accustomed to it.</p>


<p>The first speech was held by prof. <a
href="http://kennethrcarter.com/vita/">Kenneth Carter</a>, directly from the
columbia university, and served as a broad introduction about the matters that
were explored (and sometimes repeated) through the day. In a nutshell, the big
question is: might ISPs offer different degrees of performance over different
sites (or charge for better performances), permit/block/surcharge access to
certain sites or via certain devices?</p>


<p>Filtering access to network services is a common practice over the internet,
as is filtering content, and not necessarily bad: think about spam filters to
prevent <span class="caps">UCE</span> and <span class="caps">NAP</span> filters
to prevent and mitigate <span class="caps">DDOS</span> attacks, or
antivirii/IDS [systems]. Also tiered service plans, where you get lower latency
or wider upload bandwidth if you pay more, are acceptable, because
&#8220;quality of service&#8221; isn&#8217;t an absolute value: it depends by
the kind of services the user uses. And in  the majority of cases, he/she
doesn&#8217;t grasp (or even need to) the concepts behind them.</p>


<p>But what happens when the <span class="caps">ISP</span> crosses the line,
and starts blocking your <span class="caps">VPN</span> software, or your <a
href="http://www.nexlab.it/index.php/2007/05/03/fastweb-e-voip-sip-come-dicevano-una-volta-vorrete-dirlo-a-tutti-no">VoIP
<span class="caps">PBX</span></a>, or puts you into a big metropolitan network
making your boxes inaccessible from the internet, and having you to pay <a
href="http://aziende.fastweb.it/offerta/micro_imprese/ser_opzint_ip.html">lots
of money</a> to buy a public IP address (and for 10 days at most)? Hey, IPv4
addresses shortage is on the way, ok, but there are still lots available, and
using legacy <span class="caps">IPTV</span> subnets to address residential
customers isn&#8217;t a smart solution on the long run.</p>


<p><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Next_Generation_Networking">Next
generation networks</a> aim to solve addressing issues via IPv6, and its
128bits-wide network addresses, and bandwidth/latency ones, via (fiber)
separated pipes, all dedicated to different kinds of data, e.g. VoIP/IPTV: this
is what is going to be called &#8220;Fractionalized IP&#8221;.</p>


<p style="text-align:center;"><img src="/posts/2009-05-16-the-conceptual-foundations-and-the-economics-network-neutrality-rome/ngn-pipes.png" alt="" /></p>


<p>As long as competition remains in place, applying surcharges for guaranteed
QoS/bandwidth on certain services is a practice that can actually enhance user
experience: gamers have entirely different expectations than
&#8220;e-mailers&#8221;, and the formers will willingly pay more for Fast-path
DSLs to pwn their friends, while geeks enjoy a static IP address to reach their
server at home while they&#8217;re on the go. Partitioning resources on user
demand can  make a more profitable and efficient use of them, as long as it is
done wisely and <strong>transparently</strong> to users. When transparency
fails, you get the backlash that <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comcast#Network_neutrality">Comcast received
when it started blocking file-sharing software</a>. In Italy as well a <a
href="http://www.tele2.it/">provider known for his harassing phone calls to
potential customers</a> currently implements <a
href="http://www.linkedin.com/pub/dir/samuele/fogagnolo">layer7 filtering</a>
to block file sharing and to &#8220;overbook&#8221; its limited bandwidth, thus
giving a clumsy service to its users.</p>


<p>The key point, in my opinion, is about tech savvyness failure: no one here
understands anything about a media (and its infrastructure) that&#8217;s
becoming, faster than everything in history, overwhelmingly relevant in
everyday life.</p>


<p>Wisely, Prof. Carter identified neutrality issues as the <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_Men_and_an_Elephant">classic problem
of the elephant and the blind men</a>: each side of the problem can be tackled
from a completely different perspective, bringing to completely different
analyses and possible solutions. He made distinctions between vertical
conflicts (ISP vs. user), horizontal ones (user vs. user / <span
class="caps">ISP</span> vs. <span class="caps">ISP</span>) and diagonal ones
(user on <span class="caps">ISP A</span> affects <span class="caps">ISP
B</span>, and so on).</p>


<p>Applause for Mr. Carter, leaving the stage to <a
href="http://blog.quintarelli.it/">Stefano Quintarelli</a> from <a
href="http://www.nnsquad.it/">nnsquad.it</a>. He identified in <a
href="http://www.fub.it/files/Slide_Quintarelli_14_05_09.pdf">its
presentation</a> five key points upon which build a &laquo;neutral Internet
without absurd restrictions&raquo;:</p>


<ul> <li>Transparency: the <span class="caps">ISP</span> must give the customer
precise statements about its politics of traffic regulation/filtering;</li>
<li>Free choice: whenever the <span class="caps">ISP</span> changes its
regulations, the user must have the right to be informed and keep the former
ones he subscribed to;</li> <li>Privacy: the <span class="caps">ISP</span>
cannot discriminate traffic by looking at packet payloads;</li> <li>ISPs cannot
discriminate traffic on a per-user basis</li> <li>Whenever an <span
class="caps">ISP</span> applies traffic discrimination sanctioned in the user
agreement, the same treatment must be applied to traffic coming from other
networks. Failing to apply this principle is an example of the diagonal
conflict stated by prof. Carter.</li> </ul>


<p>Furthermore, as often happens in big corporations, technology innovation is
stopped by possibly uncertain ROIs: Stefano talked about a <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mesh_network"><span class="caps">MESH</span>
network</a> project <a href="http://www.assisiwireless.com/tecnologia.html">in
Assisi</a>, where a self-healing wireless network has an aggregate bandwidth
equal to the sum of the nodes&#8217; ones. Big companies have got standard
technologies and big infrastructures, but that doesn&#8217;t mean small
companies lead by visionary people cannot compete with them. And here the next
topic begins, with a speech held by <a
href="http://www.fub.it/files/Slide_Menaglia_14_05_09.pdf">Franco Menaglia from
the Bordoni foundation</a></p>


<h2>Economics</h2>


<p>The <a href="http://www.fub.it/">Bordoni foundation</a> `acts_as_consultant`
for the Italian public administration regarding <span class="caps">ICT</span>
matters. Dott. Menaglia recognizes that it&#8217;s a very complicated and
actual debate, mainly because it&#8217;s not a simple opinion exchange between
technology and market, but because on this matter depend investments of
millions of public Euros. Not to forget that <span class="caps">ICT</span> is
one of the main keys of UE development, that happens via innovative
applications and services.</p>


<p>&#8220;Neutrality cannot prescind from economic development&#8221;, he
states, and to ask users to pay more to have better services, users must
actually <strong>feel</strong> the service quality is improved, and to deliver
more data rapidly we need a more powerful infrastructure. Who&#8217;s gonna pay
it? ISPs for sure, but also content providers could make their part (e.g.
google).</p>


<p>The key here is all about business models: advertising is dying, and not
because of AdBlock Plus, but because comportamental patterns have changed, and,
in my opinion, <span class="caps">SPAM</span> and phishing play a major role
here in making the user feel unconfortable and reluctant to accept offers on
some random internet web site. So we need to find more profitable and efficient
business models, thinking about the internet as an ecosystem, trying not to
push only on our own company, and improving both competitivity and facilitation
innovation through interoperability.</p>


<p>In a nutshell, there wasn&#8217;t much content neither in the presentation
nor in the discussion, because, as <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_E._Schmidt">Google <span
class="caps">CEO</span></a> stated when commenting the 2009 Q1 report in the
context of the world financial crisis, <a
href="http://awurl.com/FgYWkh9Ey#first_awesome_highlight">we&#8217;re in an
un-chartered territory</a>. I think that smart people will win in the end,
because they&#8217;ll invent the next generation service that doesn&#8217;t
need either low latency or high bandwidth and will be extremely useful to its
users. Something capable to reach <a href="http://facebook.com/">200M of users
in few years</a> (and more) and being also profitable, without resorting to
advertising.</p>


<p>In the second part of this article, I&#8217;ll recap about the afternoon
session: it started with the interesting technical speech on new generation
networks by <a
href="http://www.fub.it/files/Slide_Trecordi_14_05_09.pdf">Vittorio
Trecordi</a> and open discussion with five telcos spokesmen (<a
href="http://telecomitalia.it/">telecom</a>, <a
href="http://www.tre.it/">tre</a>, <a href="http://vodafone.it/">vodafone</a>,
<a href="http://www.fastweb.it/">fastweb</a> and <a
href="http://www.wind.it/">wind</a>).</p>


<p>Stay tuned.</p>


<blockquote> <strong><span class="caps">UPDATE</span></strong> May 17, 2009:
The second part is available: <a
href="/posts/2009-05-16-the-conceptual-foundations-and-the-economics-network-neutrality-part-2">https://sindro.me/posts/2009-05-16-the-conceptual-foundations-and-the-economics-network-neutrality-part-2</a>
</blockquote>
