---
title: Terms of service for sindro.me
date: 2023-08-12
noComments: true
---

## 1. Acceptance of Terms

Welcome to *sindro.me*. By accessing or using my website https://sindro.me (the
"Website"), you agree to comply with and be bound by these Terms of Service
("Terms"). If you do not agree to these Terms, please do not use my Website.

## 2. Use of the Website

2.1. **Content:** The content on this Website is provided for informational and
entertainment purposes only. The views and opinions expressed by users or
authors of articles are my own and do not reflect the views of anybody else.

2.2. **User Conduct:** You agree not to use the Website for any unlawful,
abusive, or unauthorized purpose. You are solely responsible for your
interactions and communications on the Website.

2.3. **Intellectual Property:** All content and materials on this Website,
including but not limited to text, images, graphics, and logos, are protected
by intellectual property rights. You may not copy, distribute, modify, or
create derivative works without prior written consent.

## 3. User Contributions

3.1. **Comments and Posts:** Users may contribute comments and posts to the
Website. By posting, you grant me a non-exclusive, royalty-free, perpetual, and
worldwide license to use, modify, and distribute your contributions.

3.2. **Responsibility:** You are solely responsible for your contributions, and
you represent and warrant that they do not violate any third-party rights,
laws, or regulations.

## 4. Privacy and Data Protection

4.1. **Data Collection:** I may collect and process personal information as
described in my [Privacy Policy](/privacy/).

## 5. Disclaimers and Limitation of Liability

5.1. **No Warranty:** The Website is provided "as is" without any warranties,
express or implied. I do not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, or
reliability of the content.

5.2. **Limitation of Liability:** To the fullest extent permitted by law, I 
shall not be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, consequential, or
punitive damages arising out of your use of the Website.

## 6. Changes to the Terms

I reserve the right to modify or update these Terms at any time without prior
notice. It is your responsibility to review the Terms periodically.

## 7. Contact Me

If you have any questions or concerns about these Terms, please contact me at
[vjt@sindro.me](mailto:vjt@sindro.me).

By using this Website, you acknowledge that you have read, understood, and
agree to these Terms of Service.

Sincerely,  
Marcello Barnaba  
[sindro.me](https://sindro.me)  
[vjt@sindro.me](mailto:vjt@sindro.me)

Last updated: 2023-08-20
