---
title: "About the author"
date: 2023-08-12
---

Hello! I'm Marcello Barnaba, an Italian computer nerd, born on April, 11th
1981, currently located in [Bari, Italy](https://goo.gl/maps/DGa8AKUeqejgofbB7).

My interests range from Software Development to Computer Networks and Security,
from Maths to Physics and Astronomy, Sociology... more generally, anything
that's Science related. I do not endorse faith-related thinkings, and I'm
hardly capable of remembering something if I haven't fully grasped the inner
workings of a system (of any kind).

I could define myself as a strong follower of the [Hacker
culture](http://catb.org/jargon) and its way of thinking and open-mindness, but
I regret being referred to as a Computer Hacker, because I know that "my wisdom
is limited to an awareness of my own ignorance"
([Socrates'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socrates#Philosophical_beliefs)
principle).

I may be referred to as a Geek or Nerd, and I'm very proud of it :).

I'm a strong advocate of the [Open Source](http://opensource.org/) Movement and
[Culture](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/), I try to spend efforts in Open
Source software whenever possible – check out [my github
account](http://github.com/vjt).

I write code in many programming languages, I used to spend a lot of time with
[Ruby](http://ruby-lang.org/), until 2021, and currently I code mostly in
Python, golang, rust, and whatever tool fits the bill. I used to write software
also in C, C++, Perl, PHP and Erlang. My current favorite programming language
is [rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) and I am having a really great time with
it!

I've used to work for more than 10yrs for a specialized agency of the United
Nations, [IFAD](http://www.ifad.org), before switching and becoming a
satisfied Production Engineer at Meta (formerly known as Facebook, inc) and
currently holding the role for almost two years.

I'm a proud father of two wonderful kids, Alessandro and Orlando, currently
3yrs and 2yrs old, the only reason to stay up at night beside writing code ;-).

I travel around for work/technology/security conferences and
[SCUBA](https://prodivingroma.it/) [diving](http://www.acquazzurra.it/), taking
photos, writing diaries and enjoying life – that's too short to wonder why :).
I also [tweet](http://twitter.com/vjt) and
[share](https://plus.google.com/107382538213680942210) stuff on the interwebs.

**Have a good time here on [sindro.me](/)!**

~Marcello – [vjt@openssl.it](mailto:vjt@openssl.it)
