---
date: 2010-08-04T00:00:00Z
title: On the iPhone PDF and kernel exploit
tags: [iphone, security]
categories: [politics, all]
---

![Jailbreak me](/posts/2010-08-04-on-the-iphone-pdf-and-kernel-exploit/jailbreakme.jpg)

As most of you already know, there are two [open, critical
vulnerabilities](http://www.vupen.com/english/advisories/2010/1992) in iPhone
OS versions from 3.x up. The first one resides in the Compact Font Format
component of the PDF renderer and the second one an error in the kernel,
allowing attackers to bypass the sandbox (SeatBelt) inside which applications
are run on the iPhone.

The two vulnerabilities were discovered by [@comex](http://twitter.com/comex),
[@chpwn](http://twitter.com/chpwn) and other people.

Only few weeks later the [.lnk design
flaw](http://www.kb.cert.org/vuls/id/940193) on windows (guys, you're using
`LoadLibraryW` to load a damn icon!), these iPhone OS vulnerabilities are even
more interesting, because of the way the release is being handled by the
community and the vendor.

I spent 3 hours last night trying to find detalied information about the bug,
and except confused (and propagandistic) *blog posts* the only bit of
information is in this [tweet](http://twitter.com/chpwn/statuses/20173810590),
and in the actual pdf exploit running on
[jailbreakme.com](http://www.jailbreakme.com/_/). Where are the security lists
posts? Where is the CVE? Even the CERT still doesn't say anything about this
vulnerability.

There's something **terribly wrong** going on: the
[cat-and-mouse-game](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat_and_mouse) that is making
the [iphone-dev team researchers](http://blog.iphone-dev.org/) not disclose any
of the vulnerabilities they find has become very dangerous for end users: an
exploit that allows remote code execution and jail escape without no
interaction whatsoever by the user, carried via something that's used to
consider "safe" (a PDF file) is what is called a *critical* hole; while the
exploit that uses it is called a *0-day*. It's the first time in my life I see
a 0-day packaged and distributed explicitly via a web site.

Anyway, the **dev-team researchers did not have any other choice**: if they had
communicated with Apple prior to public disclosure, we wouldn't have had a so
easy jailbreak vector; OTOH now we have vulnerable phones and pads that can be
very easily exploited by mailcious parties. It's also funny that in order to be
warned when a PDF is about to be loaded thus mitigating the risk, **you should
jailbreak** your device and install the [PDF Loading
Warner](http://9to5mac.com/pdf-loading-warner-on-cydia) afterhand.

**My stand on this is that the real problem is Apple itself**: they've crated a
[walled garden](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walled_garden_(technology)),
outside any legislation, where they're the absolute god and give and take
whatever they want. *It's not gonna work forever*. I really hope that people
will understand think that **it's not the hackers' fault, rather it's the
totalitarian companies' fault**, for not giving us control over the devices we
buy from them. Hackers are only trying to liberate them, and it's [fair use
under the DMCA, after all](http://www.eff.org/press/archives/2010/07/26).

**UPDATE 2010-10-05**: I've posted a summary of this bug on the
[full-disclosure mailing list](http://seclists.org/fulldisclosure/2010/Aug/37)
â€“ you know, if it's not on FD no one would think about it :-).
